--- 
title: On productivity
date: 08/03/2011

Productivity is an evergreen topic. Digging deep into the matter, I’ve
found plenty of resources that would help you in making the most of your
time (work or not, it’s not really an issue). Most of them clearly tell
that there’s not a fixed recipe, however there are little things that
can be overlooked. I’m a developer, so that’s my perspective. And bad
for me, sometimes I don’t follow my own rules.

<more>
# The right tool for the right job

I’ve started following [Minimal Mac][], a blog by Patrick Rhorne that
focuses on a specific philosophy behind productivity, software and
man-machine quality time. It gives some serious thinking material and
I’m developing my own vision on the whole matter.

First things first, you should have the right tool for the job. While
this may sound easy, it’s not. Most of the times you end up trying
different solutions, installing many pieces of software, each one of
them with a specific feature you would use. That doesn’t work,
especiallay because you’re not giving them enough time. Asking around
doesn’t help either.

I’ve found that it’s extremely helpful for me to watch some screencasts
that show how to do stuff I already know with a specific software. It’s
something I can measure, something I’m able to evaluate.

Right now I’m learning [Rails][] and using [Textmate][]. It’s powerful
and comfortable, however I had switched to [MacVim][] for HTML and
Javascript. I don’t know if I’ll be using Textmate when I’ll have a good
grasp of Rails, I simply can’t decide now. I’ll surely try to see if
MacVim works properly with Rails.

Practice gives power and professional use of software requires time and
patience. It’s better to hold with what you’ve already got, get to know
it deep and list its limitations. With those in mind, you can start the
search for a better or complementary tool.

# Don’t be afraid

I was skeptic to try out Vim and to go back to the command line. I
really like graphical user interfaces, I enjoy using a good one and
there’s nothing I can’t do with what I currently use.

My reason to try and switch was essentially speed. I write code, so the
less I get far from the keyboard, the faster I can be. Moreover, I want
to gradually learn how to correct some bad posture habits I developed.
Going back to the command line, especially thanks to Ruby, Rails and
GIT, feels refreshing. The core commands are indeed a few to learn, but
it’s worth the effort for 90% of the time spent during coding. I do
switch to some more graphical tools ([Tower][] for GIT) is one of them
when I need to incorporate the changes made by my fellow colleagues, but
that’s mainly for a fine grain control over potential conflicts.

Going back and forth with a keystroke, using some shortcuts and spending
a little time to customize the environment I work in is essential to
save time in the future and reduce at minimum any potential distraction.

While this may sound odd, I’ve come to think that the command line has
also a side effect and it’s more attention to details. Pressing a button
is easier, while pressing enter after writing a statement lets you think
about it a bit more. It doesn’t mean it takes more, it simply means that
attention is completely focused on the command itself. Aside from a good
looking monospace font, there’s nothing beatiful to see in a Terminal
aside from the background.

# Templates and standards

This goes also for the accounting side of the job. No one likes to
prepare invoices or contracts as a side effect of their job. Neither do
I. That’s why we have spent some time in preparing some templates,
common resources and drafts. It’s something that a company does and
individuals or small teams should do as well.

When you start a new job, you shouldn’t have a clean slate. That’s
poetry, not real life. You should have a foundation: a draft contract
you can use, a template you can adapt to this job. Keep the slate for
later, this is the boring part that needs to be done fast. Think about
recurring issues in your work, all thos things that constantly go wrong
in every job you take. Why is it still happening? It shouldn’t. Try and
face them before they happen. Make a checklist of them and try to
address them. If you can, keep a couple of days off after a project to
understand what went wrong, even the small things, so you can improve in
the next one.

# Instant messaging

In most people’s mind, working from home means doing whatever you want,
which is partially true. It also means you create your own environment.
It doesn’t mean you’re always available for a friendly chat.

I sometimes put myself invisible, but the best thing to do is clearly
state that you have to work. People will get used to it. In the end,
that’s what you’re doing.

# Other stuff that may help you at home

I enjoy cooking and tea, it can be different for you. The only important
thing is that you need to find a way to keep home separate from work,
even if they share a physical location. You need to be able to stop
working when needed and start back in no time.

Separate activities, never work and eat in the same spot, try to give
yourself a schedule. Most people work 8 hours because they have to, you
can work less or more and it’s up to you. You just need to be
consistent: if you don’t, you can’t time yourself. And if you can’t do
that, you can’t forecast how long it will take to do a specific job and
that means that 99% of the time you will work more and be paid less.
Recording time is a good practice.

# Blogs and podcasts

That’s key: there are several smart people around the world willing to
share their opinion. They may be more expert than you, wiser and better.
They’re an inspiration and you can be like then or even better.

Learning is the first step, talking is the second: raise educate
objections, speak your mind after some thinking. If they’re really
awesome the way they look, they’ll point out the flaw in your logic
knowing that we all need to learn something and there’s always someone
better.

[Minimal Mac]: http://minimalmac.com/
[Rails]: http://rubyonrails.org/
[Textmate]: http://macromates.com/
[MacVim]: http://code.google.com/p/macvim/
[Tower]: http://www.git-tower.com/